---
title: Welcome to the NEW MBA
subtitle: A personal quest to help you become more capable and confident at work
og: https://newmba.co/images/og.png
layout: post
---

Hi, I'm Tom. I've spent the last 9 years as an independent consultant. One of the best things about consulting is that you get a peek into so many different work contexts, team structures and working environments.

In almost every company I work with I see the same pattern: people frustrated that their work isn't having more impact. That they're not able to convince the executive team to invest in their ideas. At the same time, I see executives frustrated that their teams aren't able to properly articulate the value of their work and create a business case for their ideas.

This is a failure of leadership, communication and perspective.

**A failure of leadership** because executives are not creating the environment and sharing the context necessary for their teams to act with agency and autonomy. They lack the tools and leadership to make good decisions.

**A failure of communication** because individuals and teams don't know how to communicate clearly and concisely to senior leadership and they don't know how to build a business case for their work.

**A failure of perspective** because you have to view a business as an ecosystem to be able to see how your work plays an important role, to be able to advocate for yourself and for your work.

That's why I'm launching the NEW MBA - to help individuals and organizations think about business in new ways. To help people have more impact and personal agency through learning communication, business and leadership skills.


I've spent the last 2.5 years building and refining my "Executive Presence" course under the SEO MBA brand - a course curriculum to teach executive presence to SEO professionals. The open secret is that the course doesn't teach you anything about SEO and people who've taken the course outside of the SEO industry have loved it.

So it's time to bring the ideas to a wider audience, in a new format.

## Ok, but what is the NEW MBA exactly?

The NEW MBA is an education platform - designed to help mid-career and senior leaders become more confident and capable, to work with more impact, influence and agency.

That's the mission. But to start with, the NEW MBA is a free email newsletter and (soon) a set of online courses.

Join the newsletter here:

{% include email.html %}

My aim with the newsletter is to write fresh ideas and perspectives to help you think about things in new ways. It'll be part practical and part provocative.

There are four main themes I'm excited to explore:

### 1. Seeing like an executive

To achieve senior roles and to influence organizations you need to understand what it means to see like an executive. Being an executive provides an odd vantage point - out of time, out of structure - it requires delicate nuance to understand how to use data, how to create strategy and how to communicate ideas. And how do you see like an executive if you’re not yet an executive?

If you like my writing like [exec offsites](https://tomcritchlow.com/2022/10/06/exec-offsites/), [exec dashboards](https://tomcritchlow.com/2022/05/06/executive-dashboards/) and [narrative strategy](https://tomcritchlow.com/2020/02/20/narrative-strategy/) then you’ll like this writing.

### 2. Communication & Influence

Early in our careers we quest for practical skills, but as you get more senior you realize that communication and influence - what I like to call *the work around the work* is how things get done. 

If you like my writing on [writing narrative memos](https://newsletter.seomba.com/p/how-to-write-an-amazon-style-narrative), [navigating power & status](https://tomcritchlow.com/2020/06/24/navigating-power-status/), [the theater of work](https://tomcritchlow.com/2019/11/18/yes-and/) or [CEO-level presentations](https://newsletter.seomba.com/p/presenting-to-the-ceo-in-5-slides), then you’ll like this writing.

### 3. Networked Careers

Careers are non-linear and don’t behave in predictable ways. The traditional MBA offers a network to accelerate your career. The internet can offer a similar springboard to accelerate your career.

If you like my writing on [permeable organizations](https://littlefutures.substack.com/p/lf12-permeable-organizations), [building in public](https://tomcritchlow.com/2020/07/23/thinking-in-public/), or [working identity](https://littlefutures.substack.com/p/lf10-permissionless-identities), then you’ll like the NEW MBA.

### 4. How Technology Changes Work

I think we're living in a golden age of new business writers and I'm inspired by Cedric Chen, Will Lethain, Mandy Brown, Vaughn Tan, and many others. (For those who want to dive deeper, I've started collecting a bunch of my favorite writing in the [/library](library))

## So, who is the NEW MBA for?

* New executives in transition questing for more control and strategic clarity
* Mid-career managers who aspire to more impact and are curious about business
* People frustrated at their lack of impact at work
* Consultants and anyone with "strategy" in their job title

The 

## Courses & Consulting Feed Each Other

Watch this space and join the newsletter for news about upcoming courses and cohorts. The first course will be the executive presence course I've been refining for the last 2.5 years. 

I'm still consulting, partly because I love it and partly because I think it keeps me sharp. I want the writing to come from a place of expertise and personal observation - not simply re-formulating content from others to cover the same topics in dry ways. Hopefully this will keep me fueled with observation and insight for years to come.

## What's Next?

Come on a journey 

Ok, there's also a library of some of my favorite resources for thinking about impact, influence, strategy, careers and more. Check it out for a vibe check for the kinds of things I want to write about.




Early in our careers we tend to care about being competent. You focus on learning the skills you need to get the work done in front of you. Things like how to build design systems, or how to 

Stage 1: Learning the work in front of you
Stage 2: Getting buy-in for the work
Stage 3: Understanding the whole system

The transitions are the hardest. They lead to the most turbulence for us personally. 

The world of work is complex, collaborative and… changing. To have an impact in this environment we need to learn how to see the world of work in new ways.



---

The NEW MBA is a brand new container to help individuals and organizations think about business in new ways. To help people have more impact and personal agency through learning how to communicate




Early in our careers we chase pragmatic skills. But no one ever sits us down and teaches us the important skills: how to communicate, how to understand a business, how to build influence, how to 


Time and time again I see people frustrated at their lack of impact. There's a belief that 

One thing is common across all of the companies that I've worked with - there is dysfunction. Sometimes more and sometimes less but there's **always** frustration somewhere. People stuck in situations not having the impact they believe they should have.

I think this comes down to some relatively straightforward ideas:

1. Knowledge of business and context for the work they're doing
2. Communication and influence skills
3. Personal working styles


It's not always functional. What you see a lot of is frustration and burn out. People feeling fed up, lost and angry at the environment they work in. And this isn't just for the younger workers - senior executives are feeling equally lost, directionless and 

Does what I do matter?

There's two ways to answer that question - firstly through a lens of "aligned with my values" - is the company I work for doing what I want to see in the world? Then there's a more pragmatic, immediate concern - am I having 

Everyone is questing for impact. Can I believe that what I'm working on has an impact on the world around me? Am what I 